# Comparative Systems Service

The new Comparative Systems service at BV-BRC combines two tools that were part of the PATRIC resource (Protein Family Sorter and Comparative Pathways Viewer) and also includes subsystems1,2, a set of functional roles that together implement a specific biological process or structural complex and can also be generalized as pathways.   Up to 500 genomes can be compared.  All of the three systems use the two protein families (PATtyFams3) that are assigned in the BV-BRC annotation process known as RASTtk4.  The global families, known as PGFams, can be used for cross genus comparisons.  The local families (PLFams) are for intra genus comparisons.

The Protein Family Sorter allows users to select a set of genomes of interest  and examine distribution of protein families across the genomes, commonly referred to as the “pan genome,” which in this case refers to the superset of proteins found in all selected genomes. This tool provides various filtering options to quickly locate protein families that are conserved across all the genomes (“core genome”), conserved only in a subset of the selected genomes (“accessory genome”) or that match a specified function. A tabular view shows protein families matching filtering criteria and an interactive heatmap viewer provides a bird’s-eye (“pan genome”) view of the distribution of the protein families across multiple genomes, with clustering and anchoring functions to show relative conservation of synteny and identify areas of possible horizontal transfer.

The Comparative Pathway tool is also based on the annotations. It allows researchers to identify a set of metabolic pathways based on taxonomy, EC number, pathway ID, pathway name and/or specific annotation type. The data are mapped to and summarized on pathway maps from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, commonly known as KEGG5. This tool also provides a table of unique pathways that match the search criteria (i.e., the genomes or proteins chosen by the researcher, or at any taxonomic level) from which researchers can select specific pathways of interest and view a KEGG Map, or on a heatmap view that summarizes the data, including presence/absence of individual EC numbers within the selected genomes.

Subsystems are also included in the Comparative Systems service.  This part of the service includes a distribution pie chart that summarizes the functionality and genes across all genomes selected.  It also includes a table showing the individual subsystems available.  When a subsystem is selected, researchers can see a heatmap showing the genes that are included in it and the presence and absence of those genes across all the genomes in the selection. 
